{\rtf1\mac\ansicpg10000\cocoartf824\cocoasubrtf410
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset77 Helvetica;\f1\fswiss\fcharset77 Helvetica-Bold;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red128\green0\blue128;\red0\green0\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc2\leveljcn2\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid0\'02\'05.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}}{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc2\leveljcn2\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{hyphen\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'05.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}}{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11320\viewh13300\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 The focus of my technical work was the metric function for determining the complexity of the inferred types. The purpose of the metric is to guide the inference in the direction of better descriptions of the input data. "Better" is defined in terms of the Minimum Description Length (MDL) principle. The objective of MDL is to minimize the amount of data required to describe the type (data format) and the data as seen through the lens of the type. In creating the metric function, the following milestones were achieved:\
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\li720\fi-720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	\'a5	}
\f1\b \cf2 Requirements document: 
\f0\b0 \cf0 Described the metric function at a high level, including the Minimum Description Length principle, and other requirements such as compositionality of the function in terms of types.\
{\listtext	\'a5	}
\f1\b \cf2 Design document: 
\f0\b0 \cf0 Extended the requirements document to describe initial versions of the metric on each of the types.\
{\listtext	\'a5	}
\f1\b \cf2 Implementation: 
\f0\b0 \cf0 Produced several versions of the metric for type complexity. Each version of the metric generated discussion (and had a few bugs). The metric implementation advanced along several fronts:\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\li1440\fi-1440\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8259 	}
\f1\b \cf3 Minimum Description Length: 
\f0\b0 \cf0 Initial versions did not incorporate MDL correctly, there was some confusion between atomic data complexity (the score for an individual data record) and overall data complexity (the score for a whole file of data).\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8259 	}
\f1\b \cf3 Accuracy: 
\f0\b0 \cf0 Discussions about the results of the metric, and intention of the metric, served to sharpen the accuracy of the metric.\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8259 	}
\f1\b \cf3 Test framework: 
\f0\b0 \cf0 Produced makefiles and scripts to guide the execution of the type inference over many data sets, and store golden and silver versions of the inferred data formats.\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8259 	}
\f1\b \cf3 Integration:
\f0\b0 \cf0  The metric has been integrated into the type inference, and now guides the type inference to lower complexity scores. This is the biggest milestone of the development.\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 \

\f1\b \cf2 Appreciation: 
\f0\b0 \cf0 Many thanks to our colleagues at AT&T and Princeton University. Without their help we could not have achieved these milestones.\
\
}